feat: new blog post _Truly Native Apps with svelte?_ (#2714)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2025-05-16-native-apps-with-svelte.md

---
title: "Truly Native Apps with svelte?"
authorHandle: paoloricciuti
tags: [svelte]
bio: "Paolo Ricciuti, Senior Software Engineer"

> description: "How we set up to build an integration with Lynx to make truly native apps in svelte"

Author: Ok will fix, i actually like it more in lowercase 😅

og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2025-05-16-native-apps-with-svelte/og-image.jpg
tagline: <p>Is it possible to build a truly native app in svelte? Soon™ it might be!</p>

image: "/assets/images/posts/2025-05-16-native-apps-with-svelte/header.jpg"
imageAlt: "The svelte logo on a gray background picture"
---

After the introduction of svelte version 3 on the 22nd of April 2019, it kind of took the web development world by storm. Since its original release, it has consistently been the most loved and interesting framework in the [State of JS](https://share.stateofjs.com/share/prerendered?localeId=en-US&surveyId=state_of_js&editionId=js2024&blockId=front_end_frameworks_ratios&params=&sectionId=libraries&subSectionId=front_end_frameworks).

![State of JS survey results showing svelte consistently on top for interest](/assets/images/posts/2025-05-16-native-apps-with-svelte/state-of-js.png)

So, it's no surprise that developers want to use it for work.

> However, sometimes the requirements force your project out of your favorite framework. For svelte, one of the pain points is that there is no way to write a truly native application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, sometimes the requirements force your project out of your favorite framework. For svelte, one of the pain points is that there is no way to write a truly native application, ideally one that allows reusing the Svelte code you already wrote for the web app.
```

I'd add something like this since this is really the main problem – not only can you not write a native app in Svelte (that alone might be fine – not everyone necessarily needs to use Svelte for all the things ™) but that means you cannot reuse any of the code you write for the (mobile) web app which means unnecessary investment compared to e.g. React where in theory you could reuse your React-based component library both on the web and the native app for example.

Author: Well that problem will still be there for Lynx as the rendering engine is different...a custom render made in a certain way might be able to render the same component to both world but the application (and probably the renderer) will need to be built with that in mind. It's actually the same in React: react native uses specific elements (`Text` and `View`) and while you can render those to dom with react-native-web almost nobody actually uses that.

Reviewer: I think if there can be no reuse between the native codebase and the web, a lot of the appeal of this goes away though.

Author: It's really the same for react native too...the nice thing is being able to use the same reactivity system and syntax you use on the web too. You can very much build something like react-native-web that can target both at the cost of a way less flexible web app but I don't think that should be the goal

Reviewer: ok, let's leave it our for now but I'd mention that Lynx allows rendering the same codebase to the web and native:

```suggestion
However, sometimes the requirements force your project out of your favorite framework. For svelte, one of the pain points is that there is no way to write a truly native application – or render the same codebase for the web as well as as a native application as Lynx allows.
```

Author: Oh right, good idea i will mention that but i don't think this is the right place for it

To be completely fair, sometimes this is a non-issue. There are plenty of projects that allow you to write a "native" application with web technologies:

- **[Capacitor](https://capacitorjs.com/)**: Sprouted from a similar project (Ionic), it builds your svelte app as a static website and serves it directly from your phone while mounting a web view to display it. It has a rich ecosystem and provides bindings to access the native layer.
- **[Tauri](https://v2.tauri.app/start/)**: It also mounts your web application in a web view, providing bindings to access the native layer in Rust. It can also build for Desktop (similar to [Electron](https://www.electronjs.org/)) and promises fast and lightweight apps.

> - **[NativeScript](https://nativescript.org/)**: Among the three, NativeScript is effectively the only one that actually builds on top of a truly native application. However, the community is not super great, and it doesn't work with the latest version of svelte.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[NativeScript](https://nativescript.org/)**: Among the three, NativeScript is effectively the only one that actually results in a truly native application. However, the community is not super great, and it doesn't work with the latest version of svelte.
```

## A new player: Lynx

Earlier this year, a new player entered the space: [Lynx](https://lynxjs.org/)!

![Homepage of the Lynx framework asserting the goal is to unlock native for more people](/assets/images/posts/2025-05-16-native-apps-with-svelte/lynx-homepage.png)

Lynx is backed by ByteDance, the company behind the popular app _TikTok_, and they are using it for some subsidiary apps. In their [introductory blog post](https://lynxjs.org/blog/lynx-unlock-native-for-more.html), they claim better performance thanks to a brand-new dual-thread model that separates the rendering of your application from the logic of your application and, most importantly for svelte, an agnostic core.

### The catch

> This seems like a dream come true... Can we finally ship svelte apps in production? Unfortunately, not so fast!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This seems like a dream come true... Can we finally ship native apps written in Svelte to production? Unfortunately, not so fast!
```

I think it's a bit confusing otherwise – Svelte web apps have of course been shipped to production for years.

Author: Yeah I agree, wasn't able to find a better phrasing.

> Firstly, the Lynx ecosystem is still very much in the early stages, but most importantly, to really make use of the agnostic core of Lynx, a framework has to have a key feature that svelte is currently lacking: a custom renderer API!

Reviewer: I'd add that Lynx only comes with React support out-of-the-box.

Author: I see this as kind of unrelated to this sentence...this is basically to introduce the need for a custom renderer api...how would you phrase it?

Author: Oh gotcha

## What is a custom renderer?

The first thing you think about when you talk about a JS framework like svelte is something that allows you to create HTML with a declarative method: instead of imperatively adding an event listener and setting the text content of an element, you declare how your UI should look, and the framework executes the JavaScript needed to make that happen. But it doesn't need to be that way. The reason why [React Native](https://reactnative.dev/) can exist is because React didn't concern itself with the DOM. In fact, React is basically just a diffing library. It takes your code, performs the reconciliation on your JSX, and keeps track through the virtual DOM of the current state of the tree.

> What actually renders React to the DOM is a renderer (most of the time React-DOM). However, since the two pieces are separated, you can actually change the React renderer. This allows you to render a React component to the DOM, to a native interface, [the terminal](https://github.com/vadimdemedes/ink), or even to [a video](https://www.remotion.dev/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What actually applies React's state to the DOM is a renderer (most of the time React-DOM). However, since the two pieces are separated, you can actually change the React renderer. This allows you to render a React component to the DOM, to a native interface, [the terminal](https://github.com/vadimdemedes/ink), or even to [a video](https://www.remotion.dev/).
```

I think this is a bit clearer

> Wouldn't it be cool if you could write all of this in svelte?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wouldn't it be cool if we had this in svelte?
```

## The mission

> Here at Mainmatter, we work with svelte, and like most of the web development world, we love it. So when Lynx entered the stage and we realized what this could unlock for projects that need a truly native app, we said to ourselves: "Let's do something about it."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here at Mainmatter, we work with svelte, and like most of the web development world, we love it. So when Lynx entered the stage and we realized what this could unlock Svelte for projects that need a truly native app, we said to ourselves: "Let's do something about it."
```

Let's look at a very simple svelte component:

{% raw %}

```svelte
<script>
	let count = $state(0);
</script>

<button onclick={()=>{
	count++;
}}>{count}</button>

{#if count % 2 === 0}
	even
{/if}
```

{% endraw %}

This is compiled to this:

```ts
import "svelte/internal/disclose-version";
import * as $ from "svelte/internal/client";

var on_click = (_, count) => {
  $.update(count);
};

var root = $.template_fn([{ e: "button", c: [" "] }, " ", ,], 1);

export default function App($$anchor) {
  let count = $.state(0);
  var fragment = root();
  var button = $.first_child(fragment);

  button.__click = [on_click, count];

  var text = $.child(button, true);

  $.reset(button);

  var node = $.sibling(button, 2);

  {
    var consequent = $$anchor => {
      var text_1 = $.text("even");

      $.append($$anchor, text_1);
    };

    $.if(node, $$render => {
      if ($.get(count) % 2 === 0) $$render(consequent);
    });
  }

  $.template_effect(() => $.set_text(text, $.get(count)));
  $.append($$anchor, fragment);
}

$.delegate(["click"]);
```

> The reactivity part of this (those `$.state`, `$.get`, and `$.update` functions) are just JavaScript, but the rest is reaching for some DOM API under the hood to get the first child, append, set the text value, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reactivity part of this (those `$.state`, `$.get`, and `$.update` functions) is just JavaScript, but the rest is reaching for some DOM API under the hood to get the first child, append, set the text value, etc.
```

![A qr code to scan with the Lynx Explorer app](/assets/images/posts/2025-05-16-native-apps-with-svelte/qr.png)

## So...can I ship Lynx to prod? 🚀

You can ship anything to production if you're bold enough!

Jokes aside, absolutely not: this is a POC using an unreleased (and untested, and unreviewed) version of svelte. There's still quite a bit of work to do before we can call this a wrap.

As I hinted before, I got some feedback from Grischa Erbe, specifically about how to mix and match the custom renderer with the original DOM renderer. This doesn't necessarily apply to Lynx, but for the custom renderer API to be considered complete, we need to make some decisions.

The custom renderer I wrote for Lynx is definitely missing some features, most importantly the ability to run events in the background thread (but to be honest, there's probably much more).

The svelte codebase will need a decently sized refactor for the custom runtime to be maintainable, and a bunch of tests need to be written to ensure that it works properly.

What can you do? Well, since you're asking...

> ## The future

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The Future
```

title casing

> Mainmatter is currently sponsoring my work on Svelte to bring you the custom renderer API. However, as you can see, there's still a lot to do, and even more to make this production-ready. So if you or your company are interested in funding the development of the custom renderer API (and a custom renderer for Lynx), please reach out!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mainmatter is currently sponsoring my work on Svelte to bring you the custom renderer API. However, as you can see, there's still a lot to do, and even more to make this production-ready. So if you or your company are interested in building truly native apps with Svelte and want to support us getting this ready to use, please [reach out](/contact/)!
```

Let's make it about the outcome, not the investment

> # Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```
